I'm delighted to have Lindsay Shepherd
and David Haskell here to talk to us in
this session. They'll talk for
for a little while then we'll have a
question and answer period with the two
of them. David Haskell is an associate
professor of digital media and
journalism and religion and culture at
Wilfrid Laurier University.
He studied here at Western and at U of T
and obtained his PhD from Potchefstroom
University. Before becoming a professor
at Wilfrid Laurier University David
worked as a journalist in both print and
television and he taught journalism at
Conestoga College in Kitchener, He's also
been a high school teacher and a
musician. Eighty two years old? Lindsay Sheppard
also 82 years old is a masters
student in cultural analysis and social
theory at Wilfrid Laurier University in
Waterloo. She has a Bachelor of Arts and
Communication from Simon Fraser
University in British in Burnaby
British Columbia she was the recipient
recently of the Outstanding Student
Award from the Heterodox Academy and on
May 12 she'll be presented with the
Harry Weldon Canadian Values Award for
her defense of freedom of expression,
thought, and diversity of views. So join
me in welcoming David Haskell and
Lindsay Sheppard.
Thank you everyone. We're gonna conduct
this conversation similar to an
interview. We have gone over what the
questions will be but we really haven't
talked about the responses. We just
wanted to make sure we knew where we
wanted to go we have about 35 minutes
for this discussion and then we're going
to move on to the question and answer
period so if we miss something that
you're curious about then please keep it
in mind and we'll come to it at the
question and answer. So to begin
Lindsay let's start with something I
know maybe people don't how did you end
up at Wilfrid Laurier in the first place?
Yeah, so back in 2013 this is right
after I graduated high school really
Jordan Peterson reached out to me (Right.)
and he said I'm gonna give you an
opportunity. (Right) Would you like to be a
right wing operative? Right. Okay. So
Jordan Peterson he comes to you just
after high school (Yeah.) and he begins
grooming you. He begins grooming you? It's been years. So okay. And from the
start it was Wilfred Laurier University
and I'd have to apply in 2017. Right
that's a long, that's a long con. Oh
yeah. Right. Whoa. All right obviously
that's not true and you know and and and
you know as well that somebody's going
to cut this piece from YouTube and it's
going to appear here's where Lindsay
Shepherd admits that she was the
operative the confederate of Jordan
Peterson but but honestly how did you
end up at Wilfrid Laurier more simple
reasons so I did my bachelor in
communication at Simon Fraser University
in BC because I'm from Burnaby which is
just outside of Vancouver and I thought
I want to do my MA in Ontario because
I've never lived there so I just looked
at what there was I was looking at
communication but I decided sometimes
communication can be a little bit
superficial in the topics it covers so
in the alphabetical list right under
communication studies was cultural
analysis and social theory and I thought
that sounds like a little deeper right
so I applied to that instead so you
thought you were getting away from the
frivolousness of communications by going
into cultural analysis and social theory
which turned out to be
worse okay I I'm not making a judgment
I'm just I'm now for my own part so I've
been at Laurier for 12 years and when I
came in I was naive about critical
theory I didn't know what it was I kept
hearing my my colleagues talk about
critical theory and I always says I
thought it was critical thinking I
thought it was such a great thing when
they wanted to include it in every
syllabus I thought well I guess I guess
it's a good thing that we're rejecting
all those other points of interest we're
rejecting those for other courses but
let's keep doing this critical theory
thing so I was naive but then what
happened was I noticed that I was
falling out of favor with my colleagues
when Jordan Peterson came on the scene I
saw that he was I didn't understand
everything that he was about and but I
did know that he was trying to say
something in a university setting and I
I supported that and in fact I was at
Western when David Suzuki was having his
debate with Philippe Rushton and and so I
was aware of how beneficial it is when
there are divergent views that are able
to clash so I wrote a wrote an op-ed in
support of Jordan Peterson and suddenly
my colleagues didn't say hello to me in
the halls then about six months after
that my own university canceled a
speaker Daniel Robitaille who was one of
the defense team for Ghomeshi
they the students on campus she was
coming to speak on our campus and
students agitated until she cancelled
and my administration did nothing and my
and many of my colleagues
celebrated this so I wrote another op-ed
for the Toronto Star and I said what is
going on at my University and I made I
made the comment that I said where are
the students getting this idea and I
said it's from their from their
professors and it was at that point that
they held a special faculty meeting
where they could tell me why I was wrong
but I come to free expression honestly
but I still didn't know Lindsay but you
can see that we we have similar
interests so moving ahead let's talk
about this next question we didn't know
each other prior to the incident well
you have to fill in some of the gaps
it wasn't happy circumstances so
what led to this first article that
appeared in the National Post November
11th that really showed what was going
on in your situation how did you get
there and what what happened to get you
there it was Christie Blatchford's article
yes okay so as part of my grad program I
was a teaching assistant and because my
degree was in communication I TAed
communication studies 101 Canadian
communication and context and so half of
that course is content and discussion
and the other half is writing skills and
for that course there was two weeks
where you had to do grammar and so I did
I covered grammar as dry as it was and
for university students right for
university students who should maybe
already know I'm taking judgments I'm
not making judgments I mean the
suggested example outline of what we
needed to teach for grammar was I walk
you walk she walks right we walk so I
just made sure my students were all on
the same page with conjugating verbs in
the English language and then I thought
well let's instead of just looking at
grammar as something dry let's think of
it is actually something that maybe has
implications in society connect it to a
bigger picture and so I brought up the
the topical issue of gender neutral
pronouns and how are those going to be
integrated into the English language and
how does that work and so I used a clip
from Television Ontario TVO public
access public so millions of people have
watched this already it's now on YouTube
available to everyone
yeah and it was on The Agenda with Steve
Paikin one of Canada's best journalists
and it was between Jordan Peterson yes I
had never met him
you really had never met that was the
first clip I'd ever seen of him and he
was in conversation with Nicolas Matte who
was a professor of transgender studies
at U of T and I just showed two short
clips of them in exchange I'm talking
specifically about you know they
and them pronouns "zee" and "zer" and so
obviously Matte's argument professor Matte
was saying well we need to use these
it's it's about human dignity and
Peterson was saying well it no it's
compelled speech and so I had like a ten
minute conversation with my students in
three different sections of twenty-five
students and I thought it went well
right no one no one stormed out of the
room no one cried it was it was civil
right but it turns out that someone had
a problem and so I received an email the
next week just a very vague email saying
you need to and this was from my
supervising professor professor Rambukkana
he said you need to come into a
meeting with me your master's program
director Herbert Pimlott and an official
from the diversity and equity office and
at that point I was not familiar with
all this stuff about ooh diversity and
equity it's dangerous I had no idea but
I still saw that and I thought this
could only be about the Jordan Peterson
Club that's it
and so I thought this is pretty crazy so
I called my mom and we had a discussion
and we decided that I should go to this
meeting which was in less than 24 hours
by the way and I and they never
suggested to me I could bring anybody
and for the record TAs at Laurier are
not unionized so there was no union rep
or anything and so I went to the meeting
and I did secretly record it right and
then the meeting was pretty outrageous
to me
I was accused of transphobia violating
Bill C16 which is something we talked
about in the class and bill C16 is
the bill that says you must not
prejudice against people who are gender
identify a certain way and right and a
lot of that bill is just completely
valid like you don't discriminate hiring
transgender people of course but then it
was just the compelled speech part of it
right and they'd also said that you had
transgressed the gendered sexual and
violence policy which I did yes which
because you'd made someone uncomfortable
yes because I learned in that meeting
that gender-neutral pronouns are not up
for debate and it's just something you
can't talk about and it creates a toxic
environment to present both arguments
for and against them those were actual
quotes yes recorded your Rambukkana
said that this is not up for debate
right and he also said it's like I
neutrally played speech by Hitler right
equating Peterson well equating TV
Ontario yeah to a speech by Hitler yes
so so this transpires and at one point
you were wondering who was the person
who had brought the charge against you
yes and I did ask multiple times in the
meeting I said how many people
complained like who I don't need their
name but like it kind of matters was it
one person or was it like ten people but
they wouldn't give me a single you know
they wouldn't even show me the complaint
like I could not see it in the original
words or anything but it turns out that
no one actually complained right right
so we're jumping ahead a little bit but
after an investigation it was shown that
no one had complained yeah it was made
up it it seems and again I still don't
know and the thing is if I hadn't
recorded this and hadn't gone to the
media with it would I have ever known I
would have probably gone on forever
thinking wow I actually hurt somebody or
multiple people and that could have
actually affected how I conduct my
entire life probably right okay so let's
take you you've got this recording now
yeah you've heard some crazy talk from
two professors and a representative from
the diversity and equity office yep and
now you've got this recording and you
know that potentially this is going to
damage your career academically they're
they're bringing this against you you
decide to take action by going to the
media that's right yeah so so who did
you go to and what was what we know it's
gonna be Christy Blachford hmm right
yeah so I did get some people
criticizing me like why didn't you just
go to the deans or something and it's
like well you know and this was touched
on earlier it would have just become in
a different framework like it would have
just been kind of covered up and like
yeah well the very fact that we had we
still have a university president who
was not willing to say from the outset
that you had done nothing wrong right
right she would not come to your defense
and and no one from the University came
to your defense as far as I know am I am
i right with that oh I did okay so so
someone did thank God for him so just to
jump in then I did see I hear this is
gonna paint me I'm sure my colleagues
are gonna watch this video so I was
coming back from a hunting trip with a
gun oh boy now now and I probably ate
red meat while I was there but anyway it
was anyway so I was coming back it was
this Saturday the Sunday after the
Blatchford piece had come out and I said
to my wife okay well I've had fun didn't
get anything
can I read the newspapers and she said
no she said you can't read the
newspapers this was November 12 this
why not she said you're not gonna like
what you read in the newspapers and so I
saw Christy Blatchford's piece and I saw
what had happened to Lindsay and I
thought they're at it again I mean I've
seen this on campus time and time again
but here's finally okay I didn't realize
that it was recording I saw all the
quotes and I wondered how that had
happened I but I didn't know I
immediately contacted Christy Blachford
I didn't know her I just I couldn't find
Lindsay's email so I contacted Lindsay
or I'm sorry Christy and I said can you
put me in touch with this young lady I
know what she's going through
I know the climate on my University and
I need to reach out to her Christy was
good enough to be the conduit for that
also at the same time I sent an email to
my president the president of my
university an email to Rambukkana an
email to Pimlott and I said is this true
you know is this true because maybe it
wasn't
I said please let me know and to my
president I said you know I about a year
ago when I told you that this was going
to happen when I said that we have a
real problem with free expression on our
campus that we've got a culture of
professors who are trying to shut down
free expression and telling students to
do it remember when we had that private
meeting and I said that it could happen
it would get worse well now it has I
didn't get any response I never have
from my university president
incidentally I didn't get any response
from Rambukkana I didn't get any
response from Pimlott so I I took that
to be that what I was reading from
Christie Blatchford was accurate I then
wrote my own article for the Toronto
Star because I thought well we need to
get this story out even more and then
after that Lindsay did contact me and
said it's true what's happened I have a
recording and we decided where do we go
from here
and it was at that point being
previously in the media I have some
friends still who who are in television
and I was able to reach out to global
news that I was able to organize with
Lindsay an interview for that Friday of
the same week because I just thought
this is so important and it really did
take some convincing because at that
time the media still didn't get I mean
these people had gone to university the
people who are journalists think gone to
university even 10 20 years ago they
don't know what has happened on our
campuses since then they don't
appreciate it but one  national reporter
Mike troll a was kind enough to come out
and that's actually where we met the
first time right and it was at that
point mike relay does the story for
global national news and the tape the
recording goes viral right what were
your thoughts about releasing that
recording yeah so at first when Christy
Blachford broke the story I wasn't sure
about the legalities of the recording so
I just said to her can you just make a
seem like I have a good memory and like
these quotes and she was like okay and
later I did learn that only one person
in the room needs to know that there's a
recording going on that person was me
obviously you can't just leave a
recording a recorder in one room and
leave right as long as I was there so
then I realized okay it's it's okay if
this is released but yes global thing is
I don't actually remember
permission to release it I remember them
saying like can we do an excerpt to an
excerpt not knowing what that would
actually be another time but then that
what did they say what was that other
the cow was out of the barn
at that point yeah and the thing I was
worried about releasing it because like
I do cry in it embarrassing well you
might not want to mention this but her
mother says I think people might think
that you are mentally unstable which was
really I mean if you've heard this
recording you you can see that here is a
woman of incredible intestinal fortitude
honestly and and and it is I mean I
would have cried with those bullies
because that's what they were and you
could hear it and the fact that she
could still keep the presence of mind
even under this incredible stress was
fantastic so so okay the it goes viral
then then what happens like let's go to
the other chronology now the world is
listening and in terms of national media
there were was a two-week period where
almost every national newspaper and the
post media chain were running articles
about free expression and Lindsay
Shepards case so what were you seeing
happening there we've got things going
on like an investing investigation is
launched a bit but what else what were
you seeing chronologically yes so there
was the investigation I mean we can jump
ahead and there was eventually an
apology yeah
professor rhombic Anna and from the
president right right but you know yes
it was almost like overnight suddenly I
noticed like really prominent people
were following me on Twitter well you
and this was you you had never been on
Twitter right yeah you're on Twitter and
then you have fifty thousand Twitter
followers well I built out and at one
point I choked and we said well now you
have more Twitter followers than Laurier
University right so this investigation
though what's interesting is all the
weird things that happen before you get
the apology because our president goes
on TV Oh
so what happened we agenda on the agenda
meta way yeah yeah I wonder if we can
show that clip in our classes it's still
up in the air I don't know but so what
happened what happened yeah so she kind
of kept repeating you know they were not
coming out in defensive free expression
bracele she kept kind of repeating the
line to Steve Paikin
you know I can't speak to what happened
in the classroom you know and it kind of
was a moment for me where I realized
like you know in university
administrators they can't take their own
position which was sad and they're not
gonna stand behind you right you
actually had to get legal counsel yes
Howard love it
pro bono yes comes and says I'll just be
with you on this and take a look at
what's going on and ultimately an
investigator comes in and says you've
done nothing wrong right and then they
is the apology after that is it is yep
yep so I did nothing wrong but there's
still people who will contend today that
what I did was very wrong so for the
people who already thought that were
they convinced by that probably not okay
let's talk about that so you are you get
the apology but who on the campus let's
not talk about administration or even
Pimlott and Rambo cannon but who on the
campus was hostile toward what you were
doing with free expression um it was the
rainbow Center so the ptq activists and
what was their issue so they were saying
that I was perpetuating transphobia and
actually any media outlet that covered
my story was also perpetuating
transphobia and that it was silencing
the voices of trans people who were
actually at the center of this whole
discussion for them it was not about
inquiry
you know classrooms or free expression
it was about trans rights you know and I
just don't see that as the center of the
story it could have been anything I was
discussing in my classroom it didn't
have to be gender pronouns there are
other taboo or you know topics that some
people are much too afraid to touch
right and what stands out to me is there
were people in the transgendered
community who were supporting you yes
but there and they
we had articles in the newspaper local
newspaper from from certain people and
others who came to a rally for free
expression and so that that to me shows
that really it was disingenuous for
those groups at the rainbow Center to
say that they were the voice of the
transgendered community they weren't
they were the most vocal the most
hostile but they certainly weren't the
unified voice on that okay so something
I noticed and if we can get to this in
in the question and answer I'd love to
go through it there was a really
interesting communication strategy that
was used by the forces of censorship on
my campus I don't want to get into it
now because I want to keep pursuing
what's going on with Lindsay situation
but there was there were it was like an
organized appeal campaign that just went
through one and then when that one
didn't work they went to another so if
we have time in the question and answer
we can talk about how what I would call
the far left and left-leaning forces on
my campus or the authoritarians if you'd
rather how they twisted language in
order to really get their way or tried
to get their way so we can talk about
that but maybe that'll be Q&A but just
being mindful of the time you had
hostility from outside of your program
but what we've had some conversations
about what it was like to be a master's
student after this hit the wall this
because you're you didn't leave the
university and you're in a program that
these these professors are really
indicative of the culture in your
program and you're still in the program
so what was it like to be in the cast
program as a student after that you get
an apology but you're still having to
finish your master's work right it was
still like hostile I did not have
friends in the room only two of them
bothered to actually talk to me about
what had happened the rest just presumed
like I am a terrible person and just
disassociated I used to go for coffee
after class with all them just stopped
some you know some of my classmates
would tweet things like that bitch
Lindsay Shepard needs to shut the fuck
up
things like that I don't know if my
classmates were involved in this but
there was an interesting campaign all
around town and around the University
campus there were these black stickers
with white text that said: "Fucking expell
Lindsay Shepherd already." Didn't it have a
spelling mistake on it? It was expelled...
yeah. I mean I'm not making it up. Yeah.
It was two L's on (They didn't take your grammar tutorial) yeah and they Sarpied out the extra
Ells so that yeah that you know that
gives me hope it means I don't have to
worry so much about my foes in this
particular battle okay so you you have
had some really tense times in your
program let's finish off talking about
maybe positive outcomes so as something
as something positive come from this has
there been a ray of sunshine in all of
this rainy gloomy um I think maybe a lot
of people woke up like especially on the
Lauria campus because this is something
that you know everyone was talking about
really and it almost kind of forced them
you know the students to engage with the
issue I don't want to say take aside but
like you know hear what each what
everyone has to say and so when you're
that close to what's happening in you
know a national news story international
news in a lot of cases you know it they
kind of woke up to something that
otherwise they might have not realized
as a problem because if your opinions
fall within the orthodoxy you might
never confront you might never think
there's a problem with freedom
expression because you never run counter
to it right you did and you ended up
starting a club on campus yes the Lorre
Society for open inquiry which is and
that's gone right that's that's been
just a cakewalk
oh yeah it's no problem it's not like we
had to raise like on GoFundMe like
almost six thousand dollars to bring in
a university professor to our campus
yeah Francis what is the news here today
yeah she's quite controversial she's
scary
Oh terrifying you know why a student
group has to pay to bring a professor to
another campus is beyond me and there's
an intersection here with something else
that's happened recently if I had to
answer the question what what was
something positive that came out of the
lens
Lindsey Shepard scandal I would have
said well we did have a free expression
task force that that then looked at the
issue of free expression on our campus
and I'm one of the members or I was up
until a couple days ago and it was an
interesting experience because I was the
only one going into the task force who
was unequivocal in my support for
maximum free expression and I don't know
the position of all my colleagues I know
the majority were probably not I don't
want to read their mind so they weren't
they weren't saying they were free
expression supporters and certainly of
the things they'd said outside of the
committee suggested they weren't but
nonetheless we did come up with a
document that did support freedom of
expression on our campus I was actually
quite proud of it and I think that
everyone on that task force had come to
some compromises and we we had a
document that we were happy with and it
was a draft document it wasn't complete
it was still going to be opened up to
the public so that they could give their
input it wasn't a done deal
it still isn't a done deal but it was
still moving in the right direction
direction I felt but then what has just
happened this week is the administration
at my campus outside of the task force
completely unknown to the task force has
now said that is going to charge
security fees for groups or professors
or associations who want to bring a
speaker onto our campus now that might
sound innocuous enough except that this
really is attacks on those students or
faculty or associations who are
right-leaning
or libertarian or conservative because
the only people who protest at my campus
and on the majority campus are on the
and they protest people who are
right-leaning so this is actually a fee
if you want to be someone who's
libertarian conservative or
right-leaning and so I I looked at this
and I said we've just crafted a free
expression statement that says we will
support the university institutionally
will support marginalized voices well I
can show you excellent research that
shows the most marginalized voices on
university campuses are those who are
libertarian conservative or
right-leaning they are the most
marginalized voices when it comes to
free expression how much money does my
university spend to help those
marginalized voices zero they do spend
hundreds of thousands of dollars to give
a platform to left-leaning voices
through our diversity and equity office
so they're already doing that and I'm
okay with that but there is no equity
they're asking people of a right-leaning
persuasion libertarians conservatives
you need to pony up so what they've in
fact done is they've created a tax on
free expression it's not free expression
if you're coming from a conservative
position so I asked my colleagues on the
task force I said will you stand with me
just to say we will not work toward a
final draft
we won't work toward a final draft until
the university rescinds this policy at
least so that we can discuss it but
unfortunately I couldn't get the support
of my task force colleagues on this so I
had no choice because it's not a free
expression document anymore this task
force document because it doesn't do
what it says it will do because it
doesn't allow marginalized voices to
have a say so at this point I've stepped
down and I'm hoping that my university
will say yeah we will rescind that
policy and we can talk more about that
at the question/answer if you'd like but
just to get to the end of this then
what's your advice Lindsay what's your
advice to students who may be entering
university or they're already there and
they see that they're being
indoctrinated not educated
what would you say to them um I see
self-censorship is one of the biggest
problems and it's something I did throat
my entire undergrad and I would even
walk away from class and really wish I
said something or challenge something
but I I barely ever did and so that's
something we really need to stop so
don't self sense don't yeah we need to
be able to say things even you know cuz
I was worried about looking dumb I was
worried about like people thinking I'm a
bad person but that's you know not an
environment you can really learn in
that's not an environment you can have
open conversations because there there
are kind of and these are the grad
students in my program they they want to
police your thought right I mean I
started speaking out this semester I
thought I have nothing to lose they
already don't like me and oh yes they
there are some students who just
wouldn't come to class anymore because I
was there and stuff like that so yeah
yeah so if you are a student here today
take her as human beings we follow I
think it's easier for us to look at
someone who's doing it already I know
that I'm that way we were hearing from
God sad today and back when I first
started being aware of free expression I
wanted is anybody else concerned about
this and I was really grateful to see
that GAD was very vocal and on his
youtube channel and I sent him an email
I said I'm grateful for what you're
doing I'm grateful there's a model to
follow I'm looking forward to hearing
from him today if you are a professor
here today or in some way you're still
on a university campus we need to learn
to be more disagreeable we can do it
civilly that's a nod to mark but we need
to be disagreeable we need to find
opportunities to be disagreeable we need
to create those opportunities we need to
find YouTube videos we don't need to
always bring in speakers if you don't
have a budget to bring in speakers find
a YouTube video that you know has
academic merit but also is going to
drive the left crazy or drive the
authoritarians crazy because it I
I'm sorry these dichotomies have left
right it's not always useful I realized
that and I nodded to Francis on this
because Francis is you know she's a
lefty in the best way but but it is
there's an authoritarian culture on
campus that that is against free
expression so I would encourage you look
for those opportunities where you can
have a showing of some kind of video
make a little bit of a stink stir the
pot because it's only by pushing back
that we're finally going to get
somewhere into the middle again all
right well thank you for your time
everybody
I'd say disputatious rather than
disagreeable I don't have to be
disagreeable questions for Lindsay and
well James sure doctor Leegin dr. James
de Ladder
this is dr. League and we're both War
vets and when I was in Vietnam we had
this policy that you know if you're
attacked and surrounded and that sort of
thing that you bring down you bring down
airstrikes on your own position and
that's what I felt at some schools not
hillsdale I taught there three years but
other schools you know it was like that
it was in your face and when I think of
trans what comes to mind trans this and
trans that is transmogrification of of a
grammatical term that is gender I I
don't want to split but I'm sure we have
a split in this some think that and I've
already talked to them that gender is a
grammatical term those of us who are
trained up in Greek and Latin you know
we learned that we learn the excuse me
the inflections the other is X of course
and I'd be interested in I realized that
conservatives libertarians let's make
room for reactionaries like yay unto the
Middle Ages I think Roberts and then
Clyde thank you very much I'm from the
University of Regina in Saskatchewan one
of the things that I one of the things
that I've realized being in a university
environment is if you are unorthodox or
heterodox in your opinions you really
have to be well thought out and really
understand your case really strongly
well if you have an Orthodox opinion you
can speak patent nonsense most of the
time and people never questioning
or critique you in that I don't know if
you've found somewhat similar and at the
University of Laurier alright what about
in your program I guess right I mean is
it don't they say duck speak like you
just kind of repeat the usual points
just to you know appeal to the people
who order you're on your side I suppose
so yes and that's why a lot of the times
when you so for example someone wrote to
me on social media and they said that
every time I bring in a speaker like
Francis with us and it takes people like
her weeks and months to heal and I'm
damaging entire communities and she
wrote this in a public forum so I also
replied in the public for him and I said
what do you mean like what are you
talking about I'm because my first
instinct was I felt bad for her
but then I read it again and I was like
I just don't get how you're not forced
to attend these talks you're not forced
to actually engage with the ideas at all
probably um how does it take you months
to heal but yeah they they can't really
respond and they don't have to actually
because they'll have people on their
side anyway make me work huh
first I just want to see if you can
confirm in the class where you showed
the clip from Peterson did you take a
site know the Neutrality was the problem
yes if I had denounced his views first
it would have been okay if I said oh
here are some terrible views by Jordan
Peterson this is what not to have it
would have been great okay so there you
didn't affirmatively demean anybody at
all in that selection so how does it
come from the way you behaved which
sounds perfectly appropriate in the
university setting not to tell the
students what to think about material
that you're showing them to being called
a white supremacist
I mean where does that come from right
no that was that was really interesting
for me is that all of a sudden yes they
were posts calling me a white
supremacist and I'm perpetuating white
privilege i'm using my whiteness i'm
using my white tears i'm a crying white
girl people before they even knew
anything about me we're like I'm a white
F no state sympathizer things like that
and I I still don't really get it do you
know well it's better than making an
argument you weren't wearing a white no
there was no dad over at the time right
thank you and I'd like to go back for a
second and I'm from the University of
Toronto Mississauga but I'd like to go
back for a second to something that
Lyndsey said and I would also like to go
back to the idea that you brought up
during the discussion of how the
authoritarians and campus elites twist
their campaigns and how they're trying
to get to something well this something
I think is part of something that Thomas
Sol noticed a long time ago when he
wrote about elites elites these days
don't dispute us on ideas this is not
about proving a point or making making a
recent statement a lot of where they go
to and this is something that so we'll
noticed is to make us feel morally wrong
and Lindsey mentioned at some point that
one of the reasons why she didn't speak
in class and that is also myself I often
don't speak up why don't I speak up
because I know that whether or not I
will be judged to be stupid or
incoherent I will be judged to be evil I
will be judged to be morally on the
wrong side I'm often spoken as the wrong
side of history so I'd like you if you
can to speak about that and I would like
David to go back to this idea of how is
it that authoritarians are twisting that
speech and how is it that they're really
confirming what saul has written about
them already a long time ago
yeah the the classes I've been in they
kind of established themselves as like
the moral police right and it even makes
me question myself like one of the first
examples that comes to mind was a race
and media course I took in my undergrad
and the prof who was actually not a prop
he was just like a sessional but he said
he asked the class in a rhetorical way
he was like a social justice warrior
right
he's like why isn't Ramadan a national
holiday in Canada Christmas is so why
don't we have Ramadan and like my first
instinct was like what are you talking
but like you can't say that and so it
makes you actually think wow like why
did I have that reaction like am i a bad
person Rahman should be a national
holiday if I'm just gonna one thing you
made me think of something I hadn't
thought of before so I do research in
sociology of religion and you made me
think about and I don't know where this
will go yet but thank you so in
established religious traditions you are
made to feel guilty about sin but you
also have a way to propitiate that sin
if Christianity you asked forgiveness if
Judaism there are means these religious
isms say here feel guilty but then
here's how to propitiate that guilt but
with social justice philosophy and I'm
using that in in scare quotes they
definitely know how to make you feel
guilty
but they really the way to propitiate
guilt is to make other people feel
guilty which is really interesting
because I see it as a religious movement
right and so so that's very interesting
to me I'm gonna think more about that
now back to the question about how did
they twist the words I saw three
movements which was really incredible
the first movement was that when they
were saying why we should stop talking
about free expression on campus the
first movement was because it causes
harm right that that was their go-to
this is causing harm so
you know I look at this and I say okay
well what is the definition of harm
because you realize they are trying to
redefine terms so the definition of harm
is and this is sort of a legal
definition it's an infliction of long
term damage that compromises normal
appearance or function so you get this
idea long term damage
compromising something so is that
happening because what they're saying is
harm was offence so they're trying to
say that I'm mentally harmed but I'm
saying well well no no because and then
I started looking at at the
psychological data on this and there's a
really good study by Scott Lilla Feld
and it was the origins of
microaggressions is what he but he
looked at all of the literature it was a
meta-analysis and he says there's you
just cannot substantiate the claim that
ideas offensive ideas harm you it's just
not there in fact if you look at
cognitive behavioral therapy they'll
tell you that the best way to overcome
this idea of feeling harmed by ideas is
be exposed to those offensive ideas so
what they were saying about ideas
harming was completely wrong so then
when when other people other academics
newspapers started saying that they
moved to the next strategy and the next
strategy was well all this discussion of
Lindsey Shepard and free expression is
causing physical violence and so they
were saying there have been threats on
lives and I'll just cut to the chase
so Globe and Mail Global TV said okay
we're gonna go check with campus police
and we're going to check with the
Waterloo Regional Police to see if
anyone has lodged these threats against
their lives there wasn't a single
complaint so unless they were just
braving them themselves I'm being
threatened my physical with this
physical violent death threats is one of
the things they said they were but they
weren't going to the police with them so
when that was exposed they moved to the
next I think this was the most clever /
diabolical they said you know what we
just need to contextualise
yes we can have debate on campus but we
have to contextualise well what does it
mean to contextualize it means that we
must filter it through a critical theory
lens so we'll let you have both sides
but we'll make clear which of these
sides is bullshit and and this is what
we'll do for you students will filter it
for you so we'll definitely have two
sides and there were op eds from
colleagues of mine who were essentially
saying we'll just filter it through the
critical lens so this idea of
contextualization was their third group
and of course one of the mousse that
fits into all of these is this idea of
well hate speech isn't free speech and
you continue to hear that and again it's
a redefinition of what hate speeches and
so hate speech under section 319 and
we've got lawyers here who can
articulate this better than I but really
it is a high high bar and offending
someone when it when you either have
truth or it's fair comment or it's done
civilly I mean that's not hate speech
it's just not but they were trying to
equate the two and of course if they can
redefine hate speech which they continue
they are always trying to do that then
then they will be able to censor on our
campuses and really in society more
generally so those are the moves I saw
thanks for the question but with your
second point about police complaints I
mean the police are a tool of oppression
to them so I mean that's why they
wouldn't go to the you know just arguing
their side oh they don't have to this is
a quote from one of the activists they
don't have to perform their trauma for
us you know they don't they don't have
to it can just be within they don't have
to tell anybody but it still exists
because they don't have to perform their
trauma right okay just an observation or
two thank you for your remarks and for
your experiences and your sticking our
necks out as we all should do I think
you know what what percolates for the
top in my mind is that we're at a very
difficult struggle because the
meta-narrative to borrow someone else's
phrase the benchmark for judgment of
justice is safety and comfort on our
campus
and trying to appeal to a construct of
disputatious free expression and
sculpting some sense of a better
collective truth after discussion and
argumentation almost doesn't exist
the automatic heuristic the the
instantaneous benchmark is comfort so
that's that's one thought that I
scribbled and the other thought is
something that's missing from this
discussion I spent 40 years as a
researcher in human sexuality and
prejudice and almost as long you know
and in civil liberties pursuits but what
is missing a little bit from the
discussion of sympathy if if an
indigenous person says you know I've had
a struggle I've had a historical
struggle you know you have a perfect
right to you know to raise these issues
but it does affect me you know just that
that's a little something if a trans
person says I've had a struggle and
you're surfacing this issue you know
brings it home to me and it doesn't mean
you know that you can't talk about so
for example when my multitude of
colleagues tell me that Jordan Peterson
is trans phobic I said no Jordan
Peterson is concerned about compelled
speech and you know at the same time I
express sympathy for people who are
struggling with you know with with with
their struggle so I don't want to forget
the sympathy piece but what we're
confronting fundamentally is a benchmark
for acceptable speech that involves
comfort and any construct any mental
reach any purchase on the idea of the
desirability of free expression
disputation and the quaint medieval idea
of a university where people work
together to figure out you know is this
an elephant or is this a donkey we're
all blind that that almost doesn't exist
by the way that you know I would divorce
the distinction of attacks on on the
right wing it's really it's really an
instrument of sensoria sness against any
controversy it's easier than burning
books and less conspicuous but if it
costs me six thousand dollars to take
this book out of the live
or to listen or to talk that's that's a
pox on any controversial idea just to
respond to this I would commend people
to take a look at a recent study
published on heterodox Academy where
they did look at who does the disrupting
and so 90.5% of disruptions 90.5% of
disruptions on University campuses in
the United States happen from
left-leaning protesters protesting
right-leaning
speakers my questions about the
complaint that was not nor the complaint
and the question is this I've read
somewhere online or a comment me where
it was so the the even the unofficial
complaint because there must have been
some filtered message that reached the
powers-that-be did not come from
students in in your seminar but from
somebody who had overheard two students
speaking about the seminar in a
cafeteria is it's not just a canal or
perhaps you don't know if it is that
it's that it's a because the students
that we're talking about your seminar
may have been praising the seminar and
then over her I mean it's a pure
speculation on my part I just wonder
what what you can tell us about that so
all we know from a MacLaine's article is
that the rainbow Center did facilitate a
complaint so it did not come from a
student in my class it came from the
rainbow Center they were not asked to do
it they took it upon themselves so yes
how they got that information it could
be this situation
two students were talking favorably and
these rainbow Center people took it upon
themselves to you know tell the
professor of my class or maybe one
student was just talking in the rainbow
Center maybe one of them uses the
resources there and was saying like yeah
this like kind of sucked maybe like
maybe they did have a problem but didn't
want to make a complaint out of it and I
think I'll never know actually but it's
entirely possible that because you you
said earlier you were afraid of carrying
with you to your grave the guilt of
having her
somebody it's entirely possible that you
didn't personally did not hurt anybody
this is trial by hearsay and and and
eavesdropping and they don't feel like
they owe me anything okay so my question
is for you Lindsey and it's in regard to
what you see moving forward so you know
as having done your masters at Laurier
and progressing for that and being a TA
no I could take the assumption that you
would ultimately down the line would
have wanted to go to become a professor
but now with this whole ordeal I want to
know if you see yourself staying within
academia for a future profession if
that's something that still interests
you and if not do you have any insight
where you would want to go with like a
communication background it's pretty up
in the air for me but I've had this
discussion with Steven parrot so I think
I could probably find a professor to
supervise a PhD sure that's not the
problem
but what I ever get hired I don't think
so
so maybe best not to try who knows we'll
see if things change I want to come back
to the three professors the three people
Rambow Connor Pimlott and the ones who
interviewed you and my might my question
is this it would seem to me almost
certainly that you weren't the first
person to whom this kind of thing had
happened have other people come forward
and spoken to you and said look don't
tell anybody but this kind of thing
happened to me what can you tell us
about this manner of of affecting their
ideological control yes I get tons of
messages from people with similar things
I think what was so I think mine is
still maybe the most extreme though just
because I was neutral a lot of the
messages I get is from people who say
they took a conservative standpoint they
took a right-leaning standpoint which
they should still absolutely be allowed
to do but the thing with me is I didn't
take any stand so that's what makes it
probably still the most extreme case but
yes I get messages you know at least
once a week and also from professors to
not just students professors who are not
behind the scenes who are very very very
unhappy about the way things are going
on yes and these people should come
forward and they feel they can't but if
you come forward your marques in
jeopardy
your degree is in jeopardy and and this
and I have I've received many emails
from students I've had students in my
office I had one fellow who came to my
office he was a mature student he'd come
back to university he had a wife he had
a daughter he was he was paying for his
own education and he was finishing his
fourth year of university and he came to
my office in tears and he said for four
years I've been told that I'm the
scourge of the earth because I'm a white
male he said he said I've been doing a
degree I won't say that but but he had
just and he could not say anything in
his own defense because he had come from
a single mother he'd worked his way up
he'd gotten married he'd he'd thought
that he had he'd performed nobly
throughout his life but he was told so
many things about why he was a terrible
person and sadly this is routine on our
campuses now and identity politics does
this because it takes away the idea of
the individual and it makes us tribal
and if you're part of the wrong tribe
well then unfortunately you're going to
have to suffer the consequences will
give Francis the last question and then
it's time for for lunch quick thank you
very much I just wanted to say first of
all Lindsey things have changed your
what happened to you has changed what
has happened on campuses and I just gave
a speech about Lindsay's case on Monday
to about 40 professors who were in
complete agreement with the terrible
situation that exists
but at the same time we have to be very
careful here that we can move things
forward as a freedom of expression
coalition university-wide canada-wide
and there's a real danger if you see it
as a right wing left wing dichotomy I
have talked to people from wilfred
laurier who said they wanted to speak up
in favor of lindsay but they didn't
because they feared being labeled a
right winger that's the problem so if
you're going to say we want to crush the
left and the social justice warriors and
all this kind of terminology you're not
gonna get that middle that large middle
that really wants to support freedom of
expression but they're afraid to do so
because they're gonna be seen as someone
who's on the right I'm a socialist I'm
not a right winger cliff Christie
Blachford Speas in the National Post
made it sound as if I were a right-wing
speaker this is a huge problem so if
you're gonna start talking and and the
second thing is these people are not on
the left the people who are claiming to
be on the Left who are authoritarians
took politically correct totalitarians
they are not left wingers they are using
this idea of the left to get other
people to sympathize with them and to go
with them but they are actually
reactionaries they want privilege they
are privileged seeking groups that care
nothing about equality they are trying
to increase their own power in the
university and that really has to be
made clear because if we keep on saying
oh these leftists and these far leftists
you're never gonna get anyone who sees
themselves as being a left-wing person
to be a supporter of freedom of
expression just to comment with that
well I I think that what you're saying
has a lot of Merit Frances I think that
also the reality on the ground is
anybody who does speak up for free
expression regardless of their political
stand they're gonna be called right-wing
now right I mean I mean it's a problem
but it is not a it's not the people who
are on the right who are doing it you
may be right I'm just saying that if
it's a matter of labeled if it's a
matter of labels it's not the people
Thank You Lindsay thank you David we'll
go to lunch